HÉLAS!


   TO drift with every passion till my soul
   Is a stringed lute on which all winds can play,
   Is it for this that I have given away
   Mine ancient wisdom, and austere control?
   Methinks my life is a twice-written scroll
   Scrawled over on some boyish holiday
   With idle songs for pipe and virelay,
   Which do but mar the secret of the whole.
   Surely there was a time I might have trod
   The sunlit heights, and from life’s dissonance
   Struck one clear chord to reach the ears of God:
   Is that time dead? lo! with a little rod
   I did but touch the honey of romance—
   And must I lose a soul’s inheritance?



ELEUTHERIA


SONNET TO LIBERTY


   NOT that I love thy children, whose dull eyes
   See nothing save their own unlovely woe,
   Whose minds know nothing, nothing care to know,—
   But that the roar of thy Democracies,
   Thy reigns of Terror, thy great Anarchies,
   Mirror my wildest passions like the sea
   And give my rage a brother—!  Liberty!
   For this sake only do thy dissonant cries
   Delight my discreet soul, else might all kings
   By bloody knout or treacherous cannonades
   Rob nations of their rights inviolate
   And I remain unmoved—and yet, and yet,
   These Christs that die upon the barricades,
   God knows it I am with them, in some things.


AVE IMPERATRIX


   SET in this stormy Northern sea,
      Queen of these restless fields of tide,
   England! what shall men say of thee,
      Before whose feet the worlds divide?

   The earth, a brittle globe of glass,
      Lies in the hollow of thy hand,
   And through its heart of crystal pass,
      Like shadows through a twilight land,

   The spears of crimson-suited war,
      The long white-crested waves of fight,
   And all the deadly fires which are
      The torches of the lords of Night.

   The yellow leopards, strained and lean,
      The treacherous Russian knows so well,
   With gaping blackened jaws are seen
      Leap through the hail of screaming shell.

   The strong sea-lion of England’s wars
      Hath left his sapphire cave of sea,
   To battle with the storm that mars
      The stars of England’s chivalry.

   The brazen-throated clarion blows
      Across the Pathan’s reedy fen,
   And the high steeps of Indian snows
      Shake to the tread of armèd men.

   And many an Afghan chief, who lies
      Beneath his cool pomegranate-trees,
   Clutches his sword in fierce surmise
      When on the mountain-side he sees

   The fleet-foot Marri scout, who comes
      To tell how he hath heard afar
   The measured roll of English drums
      Beat at the gates of Kandahar.

   For southern wind and east wind meet
      Where, girt and crowned by sword and fire,
   England with bare and bloody feet
      Climbs the steep road of wide empire.

   O lonely Himalayan height,
      Grey pillar of the Indian sky,
   Where saw’st thou last in clanging flight
      Our wingèd dogs of Victory?

   The almond-groves of Samarcand,
      Bokhara, where red lilies blow,
   And Oxus, by whose yellow sand
      The grave white-turbaned merchants go:

   And on from thence to Ispahan,
      The gilded garden of the sun,
   Whence the long dusty caravan
      Brings cedar wood and vermilion;

   And that dread city of Cabool
      Set at the mountain’s scarpèd feet,
   Whose marble tanks are ever full
      With water for the noonday heat:

   Where through the narrow straight Bazaar
      A little maid Circassian
   Is led, a present from the Czar
      Unto some old and bearded khan,—

   Here have our wild war-eagles flown,
      And flapped wide wings in fiery fight;
   But the sad dove, that sits alone
      In England—she hath no delight.

   In vain the laughing girl will lean
      To greet her love with love-lit eyes:
   Down in some treacherous black ravine,
      Clutching his flag, the dead boy lies.

   And many a moon and sun will see
      The lingering wistful children wait
   To climb upon their father’s knee;
      And in each house made desolate

   Pale women who have lost their lord
      Will kiss the relics of the slain—
   Some tarnished epaulette—some sword—
      Poor toys to soothe such anguished pain.

   For not in quiet English fields
      Are these, our brothers, lain to rest,
   Where we might deck their broken shields
      With all the flowers the dead love best.

   For some are by the Delhi walls,
      And many in the Afghan land,
   And many where the Ganges falls
      Through seven mouths of shifting sand.

   And some in Russian waters lie,
      And others in the seas which are
   The portals to the East, or by
      The wind-swept heights of Trafalgar.

   O wandering graves!  O restless sleep!
      O silence of the sunless day!
   O still ravine!  O stormy deep!
      Give up your prey!  Give up your prey!

   And thou whose wounds are never healed,
      Whose weary race is never won,
   O Cromwell’s England! must thou yield
      For every inch of ground a son?

   Go! crown with thorns thy gold-crowned head,
      Change thy glad song to song of pain;
   Wind and wild wave have got thy dead,
      And will not yield them back again.

   Wave and wild wind and foreign shore
      Possess the flower of English land—
   Lips that thy lips shall kiss no more,
      Hands that shall never clasp thy hand.

   What profit now that we have bound
      The whole round world with nets of gold,
   If hidden in our heart is found
      The care that groweth never old?

   What profit that our galleys ride,
      Pine-forest-like, on every main?
   Ruin and wreck are at our side,
      Grim warders of the House of Pain.

   Where are the brave, the strong, the fleet?
      Where is our English chivalry?
   Wild grasses are their burial-sheet,
      And sobbing waves their threnody.

   O loved ones lying far away,
      What word of love can dead lips send!
   O wasted dust!  O senseless clay!
      Is this the end! is this the end!

   Peace, peace! we wrong the noble dead
      To vex their solemn slumber so;
   Though childless, and with thorn-crowned head,
      Up the steep road must England go,

   Yet when this fiery web is spun,
      Her watchmen shall descry from far
   The young Republic like a sun
      Rise from these crimson seas of war.


TO MILTON


   MILTON!  I think thy spirit hath passed away
   From these white cliffs and high-embattled towers;
      This gorgeous fiery-coloured world of ours
   Seems fallen into ashes dull and grey,
   And the age changed unto a mimic play
      Wherein we waste our else too-crowded hours:
      For all our pomp and pageantry and powers
   We are but fit to delve the common clay,
   Seeing this little isle on which we stand,
      This England, this sea-lion of the sea,
      By ignorant demagogues is held in fee,
   Who love her not: Dear God! is this the land
      Which bare a triple empire in her hand
      When Cromwell spake the word Democracy!


LOUIS NAPOLEON


   EAGLE of Austerlitz! where were thy wings
      When far away upon a barbarous strand,
      In fight unequal, by an obscure hand,
   Fell the last scion of thy brood of Kings!

   Poor boy! thou shalt not flaunt thy cloak of red,
      Or ride in state through Paris in the van
      Of thy returning legions, but instead
   Thy mother France, free and republican,

   Shall on thy dead and crownless forehead place
      The better laurels of a soldier’s crown,
      That not dishonoured should thy soul go down
   To tell the mighty Sire of thy race

   That France hath kissed the mouth of Liberty,
      And found it sweeter than his honied bees,
      And that the giant wave Democracy
   Breaks on the shores where Kings lay couched at ease.


SONNET


              ON THE MASSACRE OF THE CHRISTIANS IN BULGARIA

   CHRIST, dost Thou live indeed? or are Thy bones
   Still straitened in their rock-hewn sepulchre?
   And was Thy Rising only dreamed by her
   Whose love of Thee for all her sin atones?
   For here the air is horrid with men’s groans,
   The priests who call upon Thy name are slain,
   Dost Thou not hear the bitter wail of pain
   From those whose children lie upon the stones?
   Come down, O Son of God! incestuous gloom
   Curtains the land, and through the starless night
   Over Thy Cross a Crescent moon I see!
   If Thou in very truth didst burst the tomb
   Come down, O Son of Man! and show Thy might
   Lest Mahomet be crowned instead of Thee!


QUANTUM MUTATA


   THERE was a time in Europe long ago
      When no man died for freedom anywhere,
      But England’s lion leaping from its lair
   Laid hands on the oppressor! it was so
   While England could a great Republic show.
      Witness the men of Piedmont, chiefest care
      Of Cromwell, when with impotent despair
   The Pontiff in his painted portico
   Trembled before our stern ambassadors.
      How comes it then that from such high estate
      We have thus fallen, save that Luxury
   With barren merchandise piles up the gate
   Where noble thoughts and deeds should enter by:
      Else might we still be Milton’s heritors.


LIBERTATIS SACRA FAMES


   ALBEIT nurtured in democracy,
      And liking best that state republican
      Where every man is Kinglike and no man
   Is crowned above his fellows, yet I see,
   Spite of this modern fret for Liberty,
      Better the rule of One, whom all obey,
      Than to let clamorous demagogues betray
   Our freedom with the kiss of anarchy.
   Wherefore I love them not whose hands profane
      Plant the red flag upon the piled-up street
      For no right cause, beneath whose ignorant reign
   Arts, Culture, Reverence, Honour, all things fade,
      Save Treason and the dagger of her trade,
      Or Murder with his silent bloody feet.


THEORETIKOS


   THIS mighty empire hath but feet of clay:
      Of all its ancient chivalry and might
      Our little island is forsaken quite:
   Some enemy hath stolen its crown of bay,
   And from its hills that voice hath passed away
      Which spake of Freedom: O come out of it,
      Come out of it, my Soul, thou art not fit
   For this vile traffic-house, where day by day
      Wisdom and reverence are sold at mart,
      And the rude people rage with ignorant cries
   Against an heritage of centuries.
      It mars my calm: wherefore in dreams of Art
      And loftiest culture I would stand apart,
   Neither for God, nor for his enemies.



THE GARDEN OF EROS


   IT is full summer now, the heart of June;
      Not yet the sunburnt reapers are astir
   Upon the upland meadow where too soon
      Rich autumn time, the season’s usurer,
   Will lend his hoarded gold to all the trees,
   And see his treasure scattered by the wild and spendthrift breeze.

   Too soon indeed! yet here the daffodil,
      That love-child of the Spring, has lingered on
   To vex the rose with jealousy, and still
      The harebell spreads her azure pavilion,
   And like a strayed and wandering reveller
   Abandoned of its brothers, whom long since June’s messenger

   The missel-thrush has frighted from the glade,
      One pale narcissus loiters fearfully
   Close to a shadowy nook, where half afraid
      Of their own loveliness some violets lie
   That will not look the gold sun in the face
   For fear of too much splendour,—ah! methinks it is a place

   Which should be trodden by Persephone
      When wearied of the flowerless fields of Dis!
   Or danced on by the lads of Arcady!
      The hidden secret of eternal bliss
   Known to the Grecian here a man might find,
   Ah! you and I may find it now if Love and Sleep be kind.

   There are the flowers which mourning Herakles
      Strewed on the tomb of Hylas, columbine,
   Its white doves all a-flutter where the breeze
      Kissed them too harshly, the small celandine,
   That yellow-kirtled chorister of eve,
   And lilac lady’s-smock,—but let them bloom alone, and leave

   Yon spirèd hollyhock red-crocketed
      To sway its silent chimes, else must the bee,
   Its little bellringer, go seek instead
      Some other pleasaunce; the anemone
   That weeps at daybreak, like a silly girl
   Before her love, and hardly lets the butterflies unfurl

   Their painted wings beside it,—bid it pine
      In pale virginity; the winter snow
   Will suit it better than those lips of thine
      Whose fires would but scorch it, rather go
   And pluck that amorous flower which blooms alone,
   Fed by the pander wind with dust of kisses not its own.

   The trumpet-mouths of red convolvulus
      So dear to maidens, creamy meadow-sweet
   Whiter than Juno’s throat and odorous
      As all Arabia, hyacinths the feet
   Of Huntress Dian would be loth to mar
   For any dappled fawn,—pluck these, and those fond flowers which are

   Fairer than what Queen Venus trod upon
      Beneath the pines of Ida, eucharis,
   That morning star which does not dread the sun,
      And budding marjoram which but to kiss
   Would sweeten Cytheræa’s lips and make
   Adonis jealous,—these for thy head,—and for thy girdle take

   Yon curving spray of purple clematis
      Whose gorgeous dye outflames the Tyrian King,
   And foxgloves with their nodding chalices,
      But that one narciss which the startled Spring
   Let from her kirtle fall when first she heard
   In her own woods the wild tempestuous song of summer’s bird,

   Ah! leave it for a subtle memory
      Of those sweet tremulous days of rain and sun,
   When April laughed between her tears to see
      The early primrose with shy footsteps run
   From the gnarled oak-tree roots till all the wold,
   Spite of its brown and trampled leaves, grew bright with shimmering
   gold.

   Nay, pluck it too, it is not half so sweet
      As thou thyself, my soul’s idolatry!
   And when thou art a-wearied at thy feet
      Shall oxlips weave their brightest tapestry,
   For thee the woodbine shall forget its pride
   And veil its tangled whorls, and thou shalt walk on daisies pied.

   And I will cut a reed by yonder spring
      And make the wood-gods jealous, and old Pan
   Wonder what young intruder dares to sing
      In these still haunts, where never foot of man
   Should tread at evening, lest he chance to spy
   The marble limbs of Artemis and all her company.

   And I will tell thee why the jacinth wears
      Such dread embroidery of dolorous moan,
   And why the hapless nightingale forbears
      To sing her song at noon, but weeps alone
   When the fleet swallow sleeps, and rich men feast,
   And why the laurel trembles when she sees the lightening east.

   And I will sing how sad Proserpina
      Unto a grave and gloomy Lord was wed,
   And lure the silver-breasted Helena
      Back from the lotus meadows of the dead,
   So shalt thou see that awful loveliness
   For which two mighty Hosts met fearfully in war’s abyss!

   And then I’ll pipe to thee that Grecian tale
      How Cynthia loves the lad Endymion,
   And hidden in a grey and misty veil
      Hies to the cliffs of Latmos once the Sun
   Leaps from his ocean bed in fruitless chase
   Of those pale flying feet which fade away in his embrace.

   And if my flute can breathe sweet melody,
      We may behold Her face who long ago
   Dwelt among men by the Ægean sea,
      And whose sad house with pillaged portico
   And friezeless wall and columns toppled down
   Looms o’er the ruins of that fair and violet cinctured town.

   Spirit of Beauty! tarry still awhile,
      They are not dead, thine ancient votaries;
   Some few there are to whom thy radiant smile
      Is better than a thousand victories,
   Though all the nobly slain of Waterloo
   Rise up in wrath against them! tarry still, there are a few

   Who for thy sake would give their manlihood
      And consecrate their being; I at least
   Have done so, made thy lips my daily food,
      And in thy temples found a goodlier feast
   Than this starved age can give me, spite of all
   Its new-found creeds so sceptical and so dogmatical.

   Here not Cephissos, not Ilissos flows,
      The woods of white Colonos are not here,
   On our bleak hills the olive never blows,
      No simple priest conducts his lowing steer
   Up the steep marble way, nor through the town
   Do laughing maidens bear to thee the crocus-flowered gown.

   Yet tarry! for the boy who loved thee best,
      Whose very name should be a memory
   To make thee linger, sleeps in silent rest
      Beneath the Roman walls, and melody
   Still mourns her sweetest lyre; none can play
   The lute of Adonais: with his lips Song passed away.

   Nay, when Keats died the Muses still had left
      One silver voice to sing his threnody,
   But ah! too soon of it we were bereft
      When on that riven night and stormy sea
   Panthea claimed her singer as her own,
   And slew the mouth that praised her; since which time we walk alone,

   Save for that fiery heart, that morning star
      Of re-arisen England, whose clear eye
   Saw from our tottering throne and waste of war
      The grand Greek limbs of young Democracy
   Rise mightily like Hesperus and bring
   The great Republic! him at least thy love hath taught to sing,

   And he hath been with thee at Thessaly,
      And seen white Atalanta fleet of foot
   In passionless and fierce virginity
      Hunting the tuskèd boar, his honied lute
   Hath pierced the cavern of the hollow hill,
   And Venus laughs to know one knee will bow before her still.

   And he hath kissed the lips of Proserpine,
      And sung the Galilæan’s requiem,
   That wounded forehead dashed with blood and wine
      He hath discrowned, the Ancient Gods in him
   Have found their last, most ardent worshipper,
   And the new Sign grows grey and dim before its conqueror.

   Spirit of Beauty! tarry with us still,
      It is not quenched the torch of poesy,
   The star that shook above the Eastern hill
      Holds unassailed its argent armoury
   From all the gathering gloom and fretful fight—
   O tarry with us still! for through the long and common night,

   Morris, our sweet and simple Chaucer’s child,
      Dear heritor of Spenser’s tuneful reed,
   With soft and sylvan pipe has oft beguiled
      The weary soul of man in troublous need,
   And from the far and flowerless fields of ice
   Has brought fair flowers to make an earthly paradise.

   We know them all, Gudrun the strong men’s bride,
      Aslaug and Olafson we know them all,
   How giant Grettir fought and Sigurd died,
      And what enchantment held the king in thrall
   When lonely Brynhild wrestled with the powers
   That war against all passion, ah! how oft through summer hours,

   Long listless summer hours when the noon
      Being enamoured of a damask rose
   Forgets to journey westward, till the moon
      The pale usurper of its tribute grows
   From a thin sickle to a silver shield
   And chides its loitering car—how oft, in some cool grassy field

   Far from the cricket-ground and noisy eight,
      At Bagley, where the rustling bluebells come
   Almost before the blackbird finds a mate
      And overstay the swallow, and the hum
   Of many murmuring bees flits through the leaves,
   Have I lain poring on the dreamy tales his fancy weaves,

   And through their unreal woes and mimic pain
      Wept for myself, and so was purified,
   And in their simple mirth grew glad again;
      For as I sailed upon that pictured tide
   The strength and splendour of the storm was mine
   Without the storm’s red ruin, for the singer is divine;

   The little laugh of water falling down
      Is not so musical, the clammy gold
   Close hoarded in the tiny waxen town
      Has less of sweetness in it, and the old
   Half-withered reeds that waved in Arcady
   Touched by his lips break forth again to fresher harmony.

   Spirit of Beauty, tarry yet awhile!
      Although the cheating merchants of the mart
   With iron roads profane our lovely isle,
      And break on whirling wheels the limbs of Art,
   Ay! though the crowded factories beget
   The blindworm Ignorance that slays the soul, O tarry yet!

   For One at least there is,—He bears his name
      From Dante and the seraph Gabriel,—
   Whose double laurels burn with deathless flame
      To light thine altar; He too loves thee well,
   Who saw old Merlin lured in Vivien’s snare,
   And the white feet of angels coming down the golden stair,

   Loves thee so well, that all the World for him
      A gorgeous-coloured vestiture must wear,
   And Sorrow take a purple diadem,
      Or else be no more Sorrow, and Despair
   Gild its own thorns, and Pain, like Adon, be
   Even in anguish beautiful;—such is the empery

   Which Painters hold, and such the heritage
      This gentle solemn Spirit doth possess,
   Being a better mirror of his age
      In all his pity, love, and weariness,
   Than those who can but copy common things,
   And leave the Soul unpainted with its mighty questionings.

   But they are few, and all romance has flown,
      And men can prophesy about the sun,
   And lecture on his arrows—how, alone,
      Through a waste void the soulless atoms run,
   How from each tree its weeping nymph has fled,
   And that no more ’mid English reeds a Naiad shows her head.

   Methinks these new Actæons boast too soon
      That they have spied on beauty; what if we
   Have analysed the rainbow, robbed the moon
      Of her most ancient, chastest mystery,
   Shall I, the last Endymion, lose all hope
   Because rude eyes peer at my mistress through a telescope!

   What profit if this scientific age
      Burst through our gates with all its retinue
   Of modern miracles!  Can it assuage
      One lover’s breaking heart? what can it do
   To make one life more beautiful, one day
   More godlike in its period? but now the Age of Clay

   Returns in horrid cycle, and the earth
      Hath borne again a noisy progeny
   Of ignorant Titans, whose ungodly birth
      Hurls them against the august hierarchy
   Which sat upon Olympus; to the Dust
   They have appealed, and to that barren arbiter they must

   Repair for judgment; let them, if they can,
      From Natural Warfare and insensate Chance,
   Create the new Ideal rule for man!
      Methinks that was not my inheritance;
   For I was nurtured otherwise, my soul
   Passes from higher heights of life to a more supreme goal.

   Lo! while we spake the earth did turn away
      Her visage from the God, and Hecate’s boat
   Rose silver-laden, till the jealous day
      Blew all its torches out: I did not note
   The waning hours, to young Endymions
   Time’s palsied fingers count in vain his rosary of suns!

   Mark how the yellow iris wearily
      Leans back its throat, as though it would be kissed
   By its false chamberer, the dragon-fly,
      Who, like a blue vein on a girl’s white wrist,
   Sleeps on that snowy primrose of the night,
   Which ’gins to flush with crimson shame, and die beneath the light.

   Come let us go, against the pallid shield
      Of the wan sky the almond blossoms gleam,
   The corncrake nested in the unmown field
      Answers its mate, across the misty stream
   On fitful wing the startled curlews fly,
   And in his sedgy bed the lark, for joy that Day is nigh,

   Scatters the pearlèd dew from off the grass,
      In tremulous ecstasy to greet the sun,
   Who soon in gilded panoply will pass
      Forth from yon orange-curtained pavilion
   Hung in the burning east: see, the red rim
   O’ertops the expectant hills! it is the God! for love of him

   Already the shrill lark is out of sight,
      Flooding with waves of song this silent dell,—
   Ah! there is something more in that bird’s flight
      Than could be tested in a crucible!—
   But the air freshens, let us go, why soon
   The woodmen will be here; how we have lived this night of June!



ROSA MYSTICA


REQUIESCAT


   TREAD lightly, she is near
      Under the snow,
   Speak gently, she can hear
      The daisies grow.

   All her bright golden hair
      Tarnished with rust,
   She that was young and fair
      Fallen to dust.

   Lily-like, white as snow,
      She hardly knew
   She was a woman, so
      Sweetly she grew.

   Coffin-board, heavy stone,
      Lie on her breast,
   I vex my heart alone,
      She is at rest.

   Peace, Peace, she cannot hear
      Lyre or sonnet,
   All my life’s buried here,
      Heap earth upon it.

AVIGNON.


SONNET ON APPROACHING ITALY


   I REACHED the Alps: the soul within me burned,
      Italia, my Italia, at thy name:
      And when from out the mountain’s heart I came
   And saw the land for which my life had yearned,
   I laughed as one who some great prize had earned:
      And musing on the marvel of thy fame
      I watched the day, till marked with wounds of flame
   The turquoise sky to burnished gold was turned.
   The pine-trees waved as waves a woman’s hair,
      And in the orchards every twining spray
      Was breaking into flakes of blossoming foam:
   But when I knew that far away at Rome
      In evil bonds a second Peter lay,
      I wept to see the land so very fair.

TURIN.


SAN MINIATO


      SEE, I have climbed the mountain side
      Up to this holy house of God,
      Where once that Angel-Painter trod
   Who saw the heavens opened wide,

      And throned upon the crescent moon
      The Virginal white Queen of Grace,—
      Mary! could I but see thy face
   Death could not come at all too soon.

      O crowned by God with thorns and pain!
      Mother of Christ!  O mystic wife!
      My heart is weary of this life
   And over-sad to sing again.

      O crowned by God with love and flame!
      O crowned by Christ the Holy One!
      O listen ere the searching sun
   Show to the world my sin and shame.


AVE MARIA GRATIA PLENA


   WAS this His coming!  I had hoped to see
      A scene of wondrous glory, as was told
      Of some great God who in a rain of gold
   Broke open bars and fell on Danae:
   Or a dread vision as when Semele
      Sickening for love and unappeased desire
      Prayed to see God’s clear body, and the fire
   Caught her brown limbs and slew her utterly:
   With such glad dreams I sought this holy place,
      And now with wondering eyes and heart I stand
      Before this supreme mystery of Love:
   Some kneeling girl with passionless pale face,
      An angel with a lily in his hand,
      And over both the white wings of a Dove.

FLORENCE.


ITALIA


   ITALIA! thou art fallen, though with sheen
      Of battle-spears thy clamorous armies stride
      From the north Alps to the Sicilian tide!
   Ay! fallen, though the nations hail thee Queen
   Because rich gold in every town is seen,
      And on thy sapphire-lake in tossing pride
      Of wind-filled vans thy myriad galleys ride
   Beneath one flag of red and white and green.
   O Fair and Strong!  O Strong and Fair in vain!
      Look southward where Rome’s desecrated town
      Lies mourning for her God-anointed King!
   Look heaven-ward! shall God allow this thing?
      Nay! but some flame-girt Raphael shall come down,
      And smite the Spoiler with the sword of pain.

VENICE.


SONNET


                      WRITTEN IN HOLY WEEK AT GENOA

   I WANDERED through Scoglietto’s far retreat,
      The oranges on each o’erhanging spray
      Burned as bright lamps of gold to shame the day;
   Some startled bird with fluttering wings and fleet
   Made snow of all the blossoms; at my feet
      Like silver moons the pale narcissi lay:
      And the curved waves that streaked the great green bay
   Laughed i’ the sun, and life seemed very sweet.
   Outside the young boy-priest passed singing clear,
      ‘Jesus the son of Mary has been slain,
      O come and fill His sepulchre with flowers.’
   Ah, God!  Ah, God! those dear Hellenic hours
      Had drowned all memory of Thy bitter pain,
      The Cross, the Crown, the Soldiers and the Spear.


ROME UNVISITED


                                     I.

   THE corn has turned from grey to red,
      Since first my spirit wandered forth
      From the drear cities of the north,
   And to Italia’s mountains fled.

   And here I set my face towards home,
      For all my pilgrimage is done,
      Although, methinks, yon blood-red sun
   Marshals the way to Holy Rome.

   O Blessed Lady, who dost hold
      Upon the seven hills thy reign!
      O Mother without blot or stain,
   Crowned with bright crowns of triple gold!

   O Roma, Roma, at thy feet
      I lay this barren gift of song!
      For, ah! the way is steep and long
   That leads unto thy sacred street.

                                     II.

   AND yet what joy it were for me
      To turn my feet unto the south,
      And journeying towards the Tiber mouth
   To kneel again at Fiesole!

   And wandering through the tangled pines
      That break the gold of Arno’s stream,
      To see the purple mist and gleam
   Of morning on the Apennines

   By many a vineyard-hidden home,
      Orchard and olive-garden grey,
      Till from the drear Campagna’s way
   The seven hills bear up the dome!

                                    III.

   A PILGRIM from the northern seas—
      What joy for me to seek alone
      The wondrous temple and the throne
   Of him who holds the awful keys!

   When, bright with purple and with gold
      Come priest and holy cardinal,
      And borne above the heads of all
   The gentle Shepherd of the Fold.

   O joy to see before I die
      The only God-anointed king,
      And hear the silver trumpets ring
   A triumph as he passes by!

   Or at the brazen-pillared shrine
      Holds high the mystic sacrifice,
      And shows his God to human eyes
   Beneath the veil of bread and wine.

                                     IV.

   FOR lo, what changes time can bring!
      The cycles of revolving years
      May free my heart from all its fears,
   And teach my lips a song to sing.

   Before yon field of trembling gold
      Is garnered into dusty sheaves,
      Or ere the autumn’s scarlet leaves
   Flutter as birds adown the wold,

   I may have run the glorious race,
      And caught the torch while yet aflame,
      And called upon the holy name
   Of Him who now doth hide His face.

ARONA.


URBS SACRA ÆTERNA


   ROME! what a scroll of History thine has been;
      In the first days thy sword republican
      Ruled the whole world for many an age’s span:
   Then of the peoples wert thou royal Queen,
   Till in thy streets the bearded Goth was seen;
      And now upon thy walls the breezes fan
      (Ah, city crowned by God, discrowned by man!)
   The hated flag of red and white and green.
   When was thy glory! when in search for power
      Thine eagles flew to greet the double sun,
      And the wild nations shuddered at thy rod?
   Nay, but thy glory tarried for this hour,
      When pilgrims kneel before the Holy One,
      The prisoned shepherd of the Church of God.

MONTRE MARIO.


SONNET


            ON HEARING THE DIES IRÆ SUNG IN THE SISTINE CHAPEL

   NAY, Lord, not thus! white lilies in the spring,
   Sad olive-groves, or silver-breasted dove,
      Teach me more clearly of Thy life and love
   Than terrors of red flame and thundering.
   The hillside vines dear memories of Thee bring:
      A bird at evening flying to its nest
      Tells me of One who had no place of rest:
   I think it is of Thee the sparrows sing.
   Come rather on some autumn afternoon,
      When red and brown are burnished on the leaves,
      And the fields echo to the gleaner’s song,
   Come when the splendid fulness of the moon
      Looks down upon the rows of golden sheaves,
      And reap Thy harvest: we have waited long.


EASTER DAY


   THE silver trumpets rang across the Dome:
      The people knelt upon the ground with awe:
      And borne upon the necks of men I saw,
   Like some great God, the Holy Lord of Rome.
   Priest-like, he wore a robe more white than foam,
      And, king-like, swathed himself in royal red,
      Three crowns of gold rose high upon his head:
   In splendour and in light the Pope passed home.
   My heart stole back across wide wastes of years
      To One who wandered by a lonely sea,
      And sought in vain for any place of rest:
   ‘Foxes have holes, and every bird its nest.
      I, only I, must wander wearily,
      And bruise my feet, and drink wine salt with tears.’


E TENEBRIS


   COME down, O Christ, and help me! reach Thy hand,
      For I am drowning in a stormier sea
      Than Simon on Thy lake of Galilee:
   The wine of life is spilt upon the sand,
   My heart is as some famine-murdered land
      Whence all good things have perished utterly,
      And well I know my soul in Hell must lie
   If I this night before God’s throne should stand.
   ‘He sleeps perchance, or rideth to the chase,
      Like Baal, when his prophets howled that name
      From morn to noon on Carmel’s smitten height.’
   Nay, peace, I shall behold, before the night,
      The feet of brass, the robe more white than flame,
      The wounded hands, the weary human face.


VITA NUOVA


   I STOOD by the unvintageable sea
      Till the wet waves drenched face and hair with spray;
      The long red fires of the dying day
   Burned in the west; the wind piped drearily;
   And to the land the clamorous gulls did flee:
      ‘Alas!’ I cried, ‘my life is full of pain,
      And who can garner fruit or golden grain
   From these waste fields which travail ceaselessly!’
   My nets gaped wide with many a break and flaw,
      Nathless I threw them as my final cast
      Into the sea, and waited for the end.
   When lo! a sudden glory! and I saw
      From the black waters of my tortured past
      The argent splendour of white limbs ascend!


MADONNA MIA


   A LILY-GIRL, not made for this world’s pain,
      With brown, soft hair close braided by her ears,
      And longing eyes half veiled by slumberous tears
   Like bluest water seen through mists of rain:
   Pale cheeks whereon no love hath left its stain,
      Red underlip drawn in for fear of love,
      And white throat, whiter than the silvered dove,
   Through whose wan marble creeps one purple vein.
   Yet, though my lips shall praise her without cease,
      Even to kiss her feet I am not bold,
      Being o’ershadowed by the wings of awe,
   Like Dante, when he stood with Beatrice
      Beneath the flaming Lion’s breast, and saw
      The seventh Crystal, and the Stair of Gold.


THE NEW HELEN


   WHERE hast thou been since round the walls of Troy
      The sons of God fought in that great emprise?
         Why dost thou walk our common earth again?
   Hast thou forgotten that impassioned boy,
         His purple galley and his Tyrian men
      And treacherous Aphrodite’s mocking eyes?
   For surely it was thou, who, like a star
      Hung in the silver silence of the night,
      Didst lure the Old World’s chivalry and might
   Into the clamorous crimson waves of war!

   Or didst thou rule the fire-laden moon?
      In amorous Sidon was thy temple built
         Over the light and laughter of the sea
      Where, behind lattice scarlet-wrought and gilt,
         Some brown-limbed girl did weave thee tapestry,
   All through the waste and wearied hours of noon;
   Till her wan cheek with flame of passion burned,
      And she rose up the sea-washed lips to kiss
   Of some glad Cyprian sailor, safe returned
      From Calpé and the cliffs of Herakles!

   No! thou art Helen, and none other one!
      It was for thee that young Sarpedôn died,
         And Memnôn’s manhood was untimely spent;
      It was for thee gold-crested Hector tried
   With Thetis’ child that evil race to run,
         In the last year of thy beleaguerment;
   Ay! even now the glory of thy fame
      Burns in those fields of trampled asphodel,
      Where the high lords whom Ilion knew so well
   Clash ghostly shields, and call upon thy name.

   Where hast thou been? in that enchanted land
      Whose slumbering vales forlorn Calypso knew,
         Where never mower rose at break of day
      But all unswathed the trammelling grasses grew,
   And the sad shepherd saw the tall corn stand
         Till summer’s red had changed to withered grey?
   Didst thou lie there by some Lethæan stream
      Deep brooding on thine ancient memory,
      The crash of broken spears, the fiery gleam
   From shivered helm, the Grecian battle-cry?

   Nay, thou wert hidden in that hollow hill
      With one who is forgotten utterly,
         That discrowned Queen men call the Erycine;
      Hidden away that never mightst thou see
   The face of Her, before whose mouldering shrine
         To-day at Rome the silent nations kneel;
   Who gat from Love no joyous gladdening,
      But only Love’s intolerable pain,
      Only a sword to pierce her heart in twain,
   Only the bitterness of child-bearing.

   The lotus-leaves which heal the wounds of Death
      Lie in thy hand; O, be thou kind to me,
         While yet I know the summer of my days;
      For hardly can my tremulous lips draw breath
   To fill the silver trumpet with thy praise,
         So bowed am I before thy mystery;
   So bowed and broken on Love’s terrible wheel,
      That I have lost all hope and heart to sing,
      Yet care I not what ruin time may bring
   If in thy temple thou wilt let me kneel.

   Alas, alas, thou wilt not tarry here,
      But, like that bird, the servant of the sun,
         Who flies before the north wind and the night,
      So wilt thou fly our evil land and drear,
   Back to the tower of thine old delight,
         And the red lips of young Euphorion;
   Nor shall I ever see thy face again,
      But in this poisonous garden-close must stay,
      Crowning my brows with the thorn-crown of pain,
   Till all my loveless life shall pass away.

   O Helen!  Helen! Helen! yet a while,
      Yet for a little while, O, tarry here,
         Till the dawn cometh and the shadows flee!
      For in the gladsome sunlight of thy smile
   Of heaven or hell I have no thought or fear,
         Seeing I know no other god but thee:
   No other god save him, before whose feet
      In nets of gold the tired planets move,
      The incarnate spirit of spiritual love
   Who in thy body holds his joyous seat.

   Thou wert not born as common women are!
      But, girt with silver splendour of the foam,
         Didst from the depths of sapphire seas arise!
      And at thy coming some immortal star,
   Bearded with flame, blazed in the Eastern skies,
         And waked the shepherds on thine island-home.
   Thou shalt not die: no asps of Egypt creep
      Close at thy heels to taint the delicate air;
      No sullen-blooming poppies stain thy hair,
   Those scarlet heralds of eternal sleep.

   Lily of love, pure and inviolate!
      Tower of ivory! red rose of fire!
         Thou hast come down our darkness to illume:
   For we, close-caught in the wide nets of Fate,
      Wearied with waiting for the World’s Desire,
         Aimlessly wandered in the House of gloom,
   Aimlessly sought some slumberous anodyne
      For wasted lives, for lingering wretchedness,
   Till we beheld thy re-arisen shrine,
      And the white glory of thy loveliness.



THE BURDEN OF ITYS


   THIS English Thames is holier far than Rome,
      Those harebells like a sudden flush of sea
   Breaking across the woodland, with the foam
      Of meadow-sweet and white anemone
   To fleck their blue waves,—God is likelier there
   Than hidden in that crystal-hearted star the pale monks bear!

   Those violet-gleaming butterflies that take
      Yon creamy lily for their pavilion
   Are monsignores, and where the rushes shake
      A lazy pike lies basking in the sun,
   His eyes half shut,—he is some mitred old
   Bishop in partibus! look at those gaudy scales all green and gold.

   The wind the restless prisoner of the trees
      Does well for Palæstrina, one would say
   The mighty master’s hands were on the keys
      Of the Maria organ, which they play
   When early on some sapphire Easter morn
   In a high litter red as blood or sin the Pope is borne

   From his dark House out to the Balcony
      Above the bronze gates and the crowded square,
   Whose very fountains seem for ecstasy
      To toss their silver lances in the air,
   And stretching out weak hands to East and West
   In vain sends peace to peaceless lands, to restless nations rest.

   Is not yon lingering orange after-glow
      That stays to vex the moon more fair than all
   Rome’s lordliest pageants! strange, a year ago
      I knelt before some crimson Cardinal
   Who bare the Host across the Esquiline,
   And now—those common poppies in the wheat seem twice as fine.

   The blue-green beanfields yonder, tremulous
      With the last shower, sweeter perfume bring
   Through this cool evening than the odorous
      Flame-jewelled censers the young deacons swing,
   When the grey priest unlocks the curtained shrine,
   And makes God’s body from the common fruit of corn and vine.

   Poor Fra Giovanni bawling at the mass
      Were out of tune now, for a small brown bird
   Sings overhead, and through the long cool grass
      I see that throbbing throat which once I heard
   On starlit hills of flower-starred Arcady,
   Once where the white and crescent sand of Salamis meets sea.

   Sweet is the swallow twittering on the eaves
      At daybreak, when the mower whets his scythe,
   And stock-doves murmur, and the milkmaid leaves
      Her little lonely bed, and carols blithe
   To see the heavy-lowing cattle wait
   Stretching their huge and dripping mouths across the farmyard gate.

   And sweet the hops upon the Kentish leas,
      And sweet the wind that lifts the new-mown hay,
   And sweet the fretful swarms of grumbling bees
      That round and round the linden blossoms play;
   And sweet the heifer breathing in the stall,
   And the green bursting figs that hang upon the red-brick wall,

   And sweet to hear the cuckoo mock the spring
      While the last violet loiters by the well,
   And sweet to hear the shepherd Daphnis sing
      The song of Linus through a sunny dell
   Of warm Arcadia where the corn is gold
   And the slight lithe-limbed reapers dance about the wattled fold.

   And sweet with young Lycoris to recline
      In some Illyrian valley far away,
   Where canopied on herbs amaracine
      We too might waste the summer-trancèd day
   Matching our reeds in sportive rivalry,
   While far beneath us frets the troubled purple of the sea.

   But sweeter far if silver-sandalled foot
      Of some long-hidden God should ever tread
   The Nuneham meadows, if with reeded flute
      Pressed to his lips some Faun might raise his head
   By the green water-flags, ah! sweet indeed
   To see the heavenly herdsman call his white-fleeced flock to feed.

   Then sing to me thou tuneful chorister,
      Though what thou sing’st be thine own requiem!
   Tell me thy tale thou hapless chronicler
      Of thine own tragedies! do not contemn
   These unfamiliar haunts, this English field,
   For many a lovely coronal our northern isle can yield

   Which Grecian meadows know not, many a rose
      Which all day long in vales Æolian
   A lad might seek in vain for over-grows
      Our hedges like a wanton courtesan
   Unthrifty of its beauty; lilies too
   Ilissos never mirrored star our streams, and cockles blue

   Dot the green wheat which, though they are the signs
      For swallows going south, would never spread
   Their azure tents between the Attic vines;
      Even that little weed of ragged red,
   Which bids the robin pipe, in Arcady
   Would be a trespasser, and many an unsung elegy

   Sleeps in the reeds that fringe our winding Thames
      Which to awake were sweeter ravishment
   Than ever Syrinx wept for; diadems
      Of brown bee-studded orchids which were meant
   For Cytheræa’s brows are hidden here
   Unknown to Cytheræa, and by yonder pasturing steer

   There is a tiny yellow daffodil,
      The butterfly can see it from afar,
   Although one summer evening’s dew could fill
      Its little cup twice over ere the star
   Had called the lazy shepherd to his fold
   And be no prodigal; each leaf is flecked with spotted gold

   As if Jove’s gorgeous leman Danae
      Hot from his gilded arms had stooped to kiss
   The trembling petals, or young Mercury
      Low-flying to the dusky ford of Dis
   Had with one feather of his pinions
   Just brushed them! the slight stem which bears the burden of its suns

   Is hardly thicker than the gossamer,
      Or poor Arachne’s silver tapestry,—
   Men say it bloomed upon the sepulchre
      Of One I sometime worshipped, but to me
   It seems to bring diviner memories
   Of faun-loved Heliconian glades and blue nymph-haunted seas,

   Of an untrodden vale at Tempe where
      On the clear river’s marge Narcissus lies,
   The tangle of the forest in his hair,
      The silence of the woodland in his eyes,
   Wooing that drifting imagery which is
   No sooner kissed than broken; memories of Salmacis

   Who is not boy nor girl and yet is both,
      Fed by two fires and unsatisfied
   Through their excess, each passion being loth
      For love’s own sake to leave the other’s side
   Yet killing love by staying; memories
   Of Oreads peeping through the leaves of silent moonlit trees,

   Of lonely Ariadne on the wharf
      At Naxos, when she saw the treacherous crew
   Far out at sea, and waved her crimson scarf
      And called false Theseus back again nor knew
   That Dionysos on an amber pard
   Was close behind her; memories of what Mæonia’s bard

   With sightless eyes beheld, the wall of Troy,
      Queen Helen lying in the ivory room,
   And at her side an amorous red-lipped boy
      Trimming with dainty hand his helmet’s plume,
   And far away the moil, the shout, the groan,
   As Hector shielded off the spear and Ajax hurled the stone;

   Of wingèd Perseus with his flawless sword
      Cleaving the snaky tresses of the witch,
   And all those tales imperishably stored
      In little Grecian urns, freightage more rich
   Than any gaudy galleon of Spain
   Bare from the Indies ever! these at least bring back again,

   For well I know they are not dead at all,
      The ancient Gods of Grecian poesy:
   They are asleep, and when they hear thee call
      Will wake and think ’t is very Thessaly,
   This Thames the Daulian waters, this cool glade
   The yellow-irised mead where once young Itys laughed and played.

   If it was thou dear jasmine-cradled bird
      Who from the leafy stillness of thy throne
   Sang to the wondrous boy, until he heard
      The horn of Atalanta faintly blown
   Across the Cumnor hills, and wandering
   Through Bagley wood at evening found the Attic poets’ spring,—

   Ah! tiny sober-suited advocate
      That pleadest for the moon against the day!
   If thou didst make the shepherd seek his mate
      On that sweet questing, when Proserpina
   Forgot it was not Sicily and leant
   Across the mossy Sandford stile in ravished wonderment,—

   Light-winged and bright-eyed miracle of the wood!
      If ever thou didst soothe with melody
   One of that little clan, that brotherhood
      Which loved the morning-star of Tuscany
   More than the perfect sun of Raphael
   And is immortal, sing to me! for I too love thee well.

   Sing on! sing on! let the dull world grow young,
      Let elemental things take form again,
   And the old shapes of Beauty walk among
      The simple garths and open crofts, as when
   The son of Leto bare the willow rod,
   And the soft sheep and shaggy goats followed the boyish God.

   Sing on! sing on! and Bacchus will be here
      Astride upon his gorgeous Indian throne,
   And over whimpering tigers shake the spear
      With yellow ivy crowned and gummy cone,
   While at his side the wanton Bassarid
   Will throw the lion by the mane and catch the mountain kid!

   Sing on! and I will wear the leopard skin,
      And steal the moonèd wings of Ashtaroth,
   Upon whose icy chariot we could win
      Cithæron in an hour ere the froth
   Has over-brimmed the wine-vat or the Faun
   Ceased from the treading! ay, before the flickering lamp of dawn

   Has scared the hooting owlet to its nest,
      And warned the bat to close its filmy vans,
   Some Mænad girl with vine-leaves on her breast
      Will filch their beech-nuts from the sleeping Pans
   So softly that the little nested thrush
   Will never wake, and then with shrilly laugh and leap will rush

   Down the green valley where the fallen dew
      Lies thick beneath the elm and count her store,
   Till the brown Satyrs in a jolly crew
      Trample the loosestrife down along the shore,
   And where their hornèd master sits in state
   Bring strawberries and bloomy plums upon a wicker crate!

   Sing on! and soon with passion-wearied face
      Through the cool leaves Apollo’s lad will come,
   The Tyrian prince his bristled boar will chase
      Adown the chestnut-copses all a-bloom,
   And ivory-limbed, grey-eyed, with look of pride,
   After yon velvet-coated deer the virgin maid will ride.

   Sing on! and I the dying boy will see
      Stain with his purple blood the waxen bell
   That overweighs the jacinth, and to me
      The wretched Cyprian her woe will tell,
   And I will kiss her mouth and streaming eyes,
   And lead her to the myrtle-hidden grove where Adon lies!

   Cry out aloud on Itys! memory
      That foster-brother of remorse and pain
   Drops poison in mine ear,—O to be free,
      To burn one’s old ships! and to launch again
   Into the white-plumed battle of the waves
   And fight old Proteus for the spoil of coral-flowered caves!

   O for Medea with her poppied spell!
      O for the secret of the Colchian shrine!
   O for one leaf of that pale asphodel
      Which binds the tired brows of Proserpine,
   And sheds such wondrous dews at eve that she
   Dreams of the fields of Enna, by the far Sicilian sea,

   Where oft the golden-girdled bee she chased
      From lily to lily on the level mead,
   Ere yet her sombre Lord had bid her taste
      The deadly fruit of that pomegranate seed,
   Ere the black steeds had harried her away
   Down to the faint and flowerless land, the sick and sunless day.

   O for one midnight and as paramour
      The Venus of the little Melian farm!
   O that some antique statue for one hour
      Might wake to passion, and that I could charm
   The Dawn at Florence from its dumb despair,
   Mix with those mighty limbs and make that giant breast my lair!

   Sing on! sing on!  I would be drunk with life,
      Drunk with the trampled vintage of my youth,
   I would forget the wearying wasted strife,
      The riven veil, the Gorgon eyes of Truth,
   The prayerless vigil and the cry for prayer,
   The barren gifts, the lifted arms, the dull insensate air!

   Sing on! sing on!  O feathered Niobe,
      Thou canst make sorrow beautiful, and steal
   From joy its sweetest music, not as we
      Who by dead voiceless silence strive to heal
   Our too untented wounds, and do but keep
   Pain barricadoed in our hearts, and murder pillowed sleep.

   Sing louder yet, why must I still behold
      The wan white face of that deserted Christ,
   Whose bleeding hands my hands did once enfold,
      Whose smitten lips my lips so oft have kissed,
   And now in mute and marble misery
   Sits in his lone dishonoured House and weeps, perchance for me?

   O Memory cast down thy wreathèd shell!
      Break thy hoarse lute O sad Melpomene!
   O Sorrow, Sorrow keep thy cloistered cell
      Nor dim with tears this limpid Castaly!
   Cease, Philomel, thou dost the forest wrong
   To vex its sylvan quiet with such wild impassioned song!

   Cease, cease, or if ’t is anguish to be dumb
      Take from the pastoral thrush her simpler air,
   Whose jocund carelessness doth more become
      This English woodland than thy keen despair,
   Ah! cease and let the north wind bear thy lay
   Back to the rocky hills of Thrace, the stormy Daulian bay.

   A moment more, the startled leaves had stirred,
      Endymion would have passed across the mead
   Moonstruck with love, and this still Thames had heard
      Pan plash and paddle groping for some reed
   To lure from her blue cave that Naiad maid
   Who for such piping listens half in joy and half afraid.

   A moment more, the waking dove had cooed,
      The silver daughter of the silver sea
   With the fond gyves of clinging hands had wooed
      Her wanton from the chase, and Dryope
   Had thrust aside the branches of her oak
   To see the lusty gold-haired lad rein in his snorting yoke.

   A moment more, the trees had stooped to kiss
      Pale Daphne just awakening from the swoon
   Of tremulous laurels, lonely Salmacis
      Had bared his barren beauty to the moon,
   And through the vale with sad voluptuous smile
   Antinous had wandered, the red lotus of the Nile

   Down leaning from his black and clustering hair,
      To shade those slumberous eyelids’ caverned bliss,
   Or else on yonder grassy slope with bare
      High-tuniced limbs unravished Artemis
   Had bade her hounds give tongue, and roused the deer
   From his green ambuscade with shrill halloo and pricking spear.

   Lie still, lie still, O passionate heart, lie still!
      O Melancholy, fold thy raven wing!
   O sobbing Dryad, from thy hollow hill
      Come not with such despondent answering!
   No more thou wingèd Marsyas complain,
   Apollo loveth not to hear such troubled songs of pain!

   It was a dream, the glade is tenantless,
      No soft Ionian laughter moves the air,
   The Thames creeps on in sluggish leadenness,
      And from the copse left desolate and bare
   Fled is young Bacchus with his revelry,
   Yet still from Nuneham wood there comes that thrilling melody

   So sad, that one might think a human heart
      Brake in each separate note, a quality
   Which music sometimes has, being the Art
      Which is most nigh to tears and memory;
   Poor mourning Philomel, what dost thou fear?
   Thy sister doth not haunt these fields, Pandion is not here,

   Here is no cruel Lord with murderous blade,
      No woven web of bloody heraldries,
   But mossy dells for roving comrades made,
      Warm valleys where the tired student lies
   With half-shut book, and many a winding walk
   Where rustic lovers stray at eve in happy simple talk.

   The harmless rabbit gambols with its young
      Across the trampled towing-path, where late
   A troop of laughing boys in jostling throng
      Cheered with their noisy cries the racing eight;
   The gossamer, with ravelled silver threads,
   Works at its little loom, and from the dusky red-eaved sheds

   Of the lone Farm a flickering light shines out
      Where the swinked shepherd drives his bleating flock
   Back to their wattled sheep-cotes, a faint shout
      Comes from some Oxford boat at Sandford lock,
   And starts the moor-hen from the sedgy rill,
   And the dim lengthening shadows flit like swallows up the hill.

   The heron passes homeward to the mere,
      The blue mist creeps among the shivering trees,
   Gold world by world the silent stars appear,
      And like a blossom blown before the breeze
   A white moon drifts across the shimmering sky,
   Mute arbitress of all thy sad, thy rapturous threnody.

   She does not heed thee, wherefore should she heed,
      She knows Endymion is not far away;
   ’Tis I, ’tis I, whose soul is as the reed
      Which has no message of its own to play,
   So pipes another’s bidding, it is I,
   Drifting with every wind on the wide sea of misery.

   Ah! the brown bird has ceased: one exquisite trill
      About the sombre woodland seems to cling
   Dying in music, else the air is still,
      So still that one might hear the bat’s small wing
   Wander and wheel above the pines, or tell
   Each tiny dew-drop dripping from the bluebell’s brimming cell.

   And far away across the lengthening wold,
      Across the willowy flats and thickets brown,
   Magdalen’s tall tower tipped with tremulous gold
      Marks the long High Street of the little town,
   And warns me to return; I must not wait,
   Hark! ’t is the curfew booming from the bell at Christ Church gate.



WIND FLOWERS


IMPRESSION DU MATIN


   THE Thames nocturne of blue and gold
      Changed to a Harmony in grey:
      A barge with ochre-coloured hay
   Dropt from the wharf: and chill and cold

   The yellow fog came creeping down
      The bridges, till the houses’ walls
      Seemed changed to shadows and St. Paul’s
   Loomed like a bubble o’er the town.

   Then suddenly arose the clang
      Of waking life; the streets were stirred
      With country waggons: and a bird
   Flew to the glistening roofs and sang.

   But one pale woman all alone,
      The daylight kissing her wan hair,
      Loitered beneath the gas lamps’ flare,
   With lips of flame and heart of stone.


MAGDALEN WALKS


   THE little white clouds are racing over the sky,
      And the fields are strewn with the gold of the flower of March,
      The daffodil breaks under foot, and the tasselled larch
   Sways and swings as the thrush goes hurrying by.

   A delicate odour is borne on the wings of the morning breeze,
      The odour of deep wet grass, and of brown new-furrowed earth,
      The birds are singing for joy of the Spring’s glad birth,
   Hopping from branch to branch on the rocking trees.

   And all the woods are alive with the murmur and sound of Spring,
      And the rose-bud breaks into pink on the climbing briar,
      And the crocus-bed is a quivering moon of fire
   Girdled round with the belt of an amethyst ring.

   And the plane to the pine-tree is whispering some tale of love
      Till it rustles with laughter and tosses its mantle of green,
      And the gloom of the wych-elm’s hollow is lit with the iris sheen
   Of the burnished rainbow throat and the silver breast of a dove.

   See! the lark starts up from his bed in the meadow there,
      Breaking the gossamer threads and the nets of dew,
      And flashing adown the river, a flame of blue!
   The kingfisher flies like an arrow, and wounds the air.


ATHANASIA


   TO that gaunt House of Art which lacks for naught
      Of all the great things men have saved from Time,
   The withered body of a girl was brought
      Dead ere the world’s glad youth had touched its prime,
   And seen by lonely Arabs lying hid
   In the dim womb of some black pyramid.

   But when they had unloosed the linen band
      Which swathed the Egyptian’s body,—lo! was found
   Closed in the wasted hollow of her hand
      A little seed, which sown in English ground
   Did wondrous snow of starry blossoms bear
   And spread rich odours through our spring-tide air.

   With such strange arts this flower did allure
      That all forgotten was the asphodel,
   And the brown bee, the lily’s paramour,
      Forsook the cup where he was wont to dwell,
   For not a thing of earth it seemed to be,
   But stolen from some heavenly Arcady.

   In vain the sad narcissus, wan and white
      At its own beauty, hung across the stream,
   The purple dragon-fly had no delight
      With its gold dust to make his wings a-gleam,
   Ah! no delight the jasmine-bloom to kiss,
   Or brush the rain-pearls from the eucharis.

   For love of it the passionate nightingale
      Forgot the hills of Thrace, the cruel king,
   And the pale dove no longer cared to sail
      Through the wet woods at time of blossoming,
   But round this flower of Egypt sought to float,
   With silvered wing and amethystine throat.

   While the hot sun blazed in his tower of blue
      A cooling wind crept from the land of snows,
   And the warm south with tender tears of dew
      Drenched its white leaves when Hesperos up-rose
   Amid those sea-green meadows of the sky
   On which the scarlet bars of sunset lie.

   But when o’er wastes of lily-haunted field
      The tired birds had stayed their amorous tune,
   And broad and glittering like an argent shield
      High in the sapphire heavens hung the moon,
   Did no strange dream or evil memory make
   Each tremulous petal of its blossoms shake?

   Ah no! to this bright flower a thousand years
      Seemed but the lingering of a summer’s day,
   It never knew the tide of cankering fears
      Which turn a boy’s gold hair to withered grey,
   The dread desire of death it never knew,
   Or how all folk that they were born must rue.

   For we to death with pipe and dancing go,
      Nor would we pass the ivory gate again,
   As some sad river wearied of its flow
      Through the dull plains, the haunts of common men,
   Leaps lover-like into the terrible sea!
   And counts it gain to die so gloriously.

   We mar our lordly strength in barren strife
      With the world’s legions led by clamorous care,
   It never feels decay but gathers life
      From the pure sunlight and the supreme air,
   We live beneath Time’s wasting sovereignty,
   It is the child of all eternity.


SERENADE


                               (FOR MUSIC)

   THE western wind is blowing fair
      Across the dark Ægean sea,
   And at the secret marble stair
      My Tyrian galley waits for thee.
   Come down! the purple sail is spread,
      The watchman sleeps within the town,
   O leave thy lily-flowered bed,
      O Lady mine come down, come down!

   She will not come, I know her well,
      Of lover’s vows she hath no care,
   And little good a man can tell
      Of one so cruel and so fair.
   True love is but a woman’s toy,
      They never know the lover’s pain,
   And I who loved as loves a boy
      Must love in vain, must love in vain.

   O noble pilot, tell me true,
      Is that the sheen of golden hair?
   Or is it but the tangled dew
      That binds the passion-flowers there?
   Good sailor come and tell me now
      Is that my Lady’s lily hand?
   Or is it but the gleaming prow,
      Or is it but the silver sand?

   No! no! ’tis not the tangled dew,
      ’Tis not the silver-fretted sand,
   It is my own dear Lady true
      With golden hair and lily hand!
   O noble pilot, steer for Troy,
      Good sailor, ply the labouring oar,
   This is the Queen of life and joy
      Whom we must bear from Grecian shore!

   The waning sky grows faint and blue,
      It wants an hour still of day,
   Aboard! aboard! my gallant crew,
      O Lady mine, away! away!
   O noble pilot, steer for Troy,
      Good sailor, ply the labouring oar,
   O loved as only loves a boy!
      O loved for ever evermore!


ENDYMION


                               (FOR MUSIC)

   THE apple trees are hung with gold,
      And birds are loud in Arcady,
   The sheep lie bleating in the fold,
   The wild goat runs across the wold,
   But yesterday his love he told,
      I know he will come back to me.
   O rising moon!  O Lady moon!
      Be you my lover’s sentinel,
      You cannot choose but know him well,
   For he is shod with purple shoon,
   You cannot choose but know my love,
      For he a shepherd’s crook doth bear,
   And he is soft as any dove,
      And brown and curly is his hair.

   The turtle now has ceased to call
      Upon her crimson-footed groom,
   The grey wolf prowls about the stall,
   The lily’s singing seneschal
   Sleeps in the lily-bell, and all
      The violet hills are lost in gloom.
   O risen moon!  O holy moon!
      Stand on the top of Helice,
      And if my own true love you see,
   Ah! if you see the purple shoon,
   The hazel crook, the lad’s brown hair,
      The goat-skin wrapped about his arm,
   Tell him that I am waiting where
      The rushlight glimmers in the Farm.

   The falling dew is cold and chill,
      And no bird sings in Arcady,
   The little fauns have left the hill,
   Even the tired daffodil
   Has closed its gilded doors, and still
      My lover comes not back to me.
   False moon!  False moon!  O waning moon!
      Where is my own true lover gone,
      Where are the lips vermilion,
   The shepherd’s crook, the purple shoon?
   Why spread that silver pavilion,
      Why wear that veil of drifting mist?
   Ah! thou hast young Endymion,
      Thou hast the lips that should be kissed!


LA BELLA DONNA DELLA MIA MENTE


   MY limbs are wasted with a flame,
      My feet are sore with travelling,
   For, calling on my Lady’s name,
      My lips have now forgot to sing.

   O Linnet in the wild-rose brake
      Strain for my Love thy melody,
   O Lark sing louder for love’s sake,
      My gentle Lady passeth by.

   She is too fair for any man
      To see or hold his heart’s delight,
   Fairer than Queen or courtesan
      Or moonlit water in the night.

   Her hair is bound with myrtle leaves,
      (Green leaves upon her golden hair!)
   Green grasses through the yellow sheaves
      Of autumn corn are not more fair.

   Her little lips, more made to kiss
      Than to cry bitterly for pain,
   Are tremulous as brook-water is,
      Or roses after evening rain.

   Her neck is like white melilote
      Flushing for pleasure of the sun,
   The throbbing of the linnet’s throat
      Is not so sweet to look upon.

   As a pomegranate, cut in twain,
      White-seeded, is her crimson mouth,
   Her cheeks are as the fading stain
      Where the peach reddens to the south.

   O twining hands!  O delicate
      White body made for love and pain!
   O House of love!  O desolate
      Pale flower beaten by the rain!


CHANSON


   A RING of gold and a milk-white dove
      Are goodly gifts for thee,
   And a hempen rope for your own love
      To hang upon a tree.

   For you a House of Ivory,
      (Roses are white in the rose-bower)!
   A narrow bed for me to lie,
      (White, O white, is the hemlock flower)!

   Myrtle and jessamine for you,
      (O the red rose is fair to see)!
   For me the cypress and the rue,
      (Finest of all is rosemary)!

   For you three lovers of your hand,
      (Green grass where a man lies dead)!
   For me three paces on the sand,
      (Plant lilies at my head)!



CHARMIDES


                                     I.

   HE was a Grecian lad, who coming home
      With pulpy figs and wine from Sicily
   Stood at his galley’s prow, and let the foam
      Blow through his crisp brown curls unconsciously,
   And holding wave and wind in boy’s despite
   Peered from his dripping seat across the wet and stormy night.

   Till with the dawn he saw a burnished spear
      Like a thin thread of gold against the sky,
   And hoisted sail, and strained the creaking gear,
      And bade the pilot head her lustily
   Against the nor’west gale, and all day long
   Held on his way, and marked the rowers’ time with measured song.

   And when the faint Corinthian hills were red
      Dropped anchor in a little sandy bay,
   And with fresh boughs of olive crowned his head,
      And brushed from cheek and throat the hoary spray,
   And washed his limbs with oil, and from the hold
   Brought out his linen tunic and his sandals brazen-soled,

   And a rich robe stained with the fishers’ juice
      Which of some swarthy trader he had bought
   Upon the sunny quay at Syracuse,
      And was with Tyrian broideries inwrought,
   And by the questioning merchants made his way
   Up through the soft and silver woods, and when the labouring day

   Had spun its tangled web of crimson cloud,
      Clomb the high hill, and with swift silent feet
   Crept to the fane unnoticed by the crowd
      Of busy priests, and from some dark retreat
   Watched the young swains his frolic playmates bring
   The firstling of their little flock, and the shy shepherd fling

   The crackling salt upon the flame, or hang
      His studded crook against the temple wall
   To Her who keeps away the ravenous fang
      Of the base wolf from homestead and from stall;
   And then the clear-voiced maidens ’gan to sing,
   And to the altar each man brought some goodly offering,

   A beechen cup brimming with milky foam,
      A fair cloth wrought with cunning imagery
   Of hounds in chase, a waxen honey-comb
      Dripping with oozy gold which scarce the bee
   Had ceased from building, a black skin of oil
   Meet for the wrestlers, a great boar the fierce and white-tusked spoil

   Stolen from Artemis that jealous maid
      To please Athena, and the dappled hide
   Of a tall stag who in some mountain glade
      Had met the shaft; and then the herald cried,
   And from the pillared precinct one by one
   Went the glad Greeks well pleased that they their simple vows had
   done.

   And the old priest put out the waning fires
      Save that one lamp whose restless ruby glowed
   For ever in the cell, and the shrill lyres
      Came fainter on the wind, as down the road
   In joyous dance these country folk did pass,
   And with stout hands the warder closed the gates of polished brass.

   Long time he lay and hardly dared to breathe,
      And heard the cadenced drip of spilt-out wine,
   And the rose-petals falling from the wreath
      As the night breezes wandered through the shrine,
   And seemed to be in some entrancèd swoon
   Till through the open roof above the full and brimming moon

   Flooded with sheeny waves the marble floor,
      When from his nook up leapt the venturous lad,
   And flinging wide the cedar-carven door
      Beheld an awful image saffron-clad
   And armed for battle! the gaunt Griffin glared
   From the huge helm, and the long lance of wreck and ruin flared

   Like a red rod of flame, stony and steeled
      The Gorgon’s head its leaden eyeballs rolled,
   And writhed its snaky horrors through the shield,
      And gaped aghast with bloodless lips and cold
   In passion impotent, while with blind gaze
   The blinking owl between the feet hooted in shrill amaze.

   The lonely fisher as he trimmed his lamp
      Far out at sea off Sunium, or cast
   The net for tunnies, heard a brazen tramp
      Of horses smite the waves, and a wild blast
   Divide the folded curtains of the night,
   And knelt upon the little poop, and prayed in holy fright.

   And guilty lovers in their venery
      Forgat a little while their stolen sweets,
   Deeming they heard dread Dian’s bitter cry;
      And the grim watchmen on their lofty seats
   Ran to their shields in haste precipitate,
   Or strained black-bearded throats across the dusky parapet.

   For round the temple rolled the clang of arms,
      And the twelve Gods leapt up in marble fear,
   And the air quaked with dissonant alarums
      Till huge Poseidon shook his mighty spear,
   And on the frieze the prancing horses neighed,
   And the low tread of hurrying feet rang from the cavalcade.

   Ready for death with parted lips he stood,
      And well content at such a price to see
   That calm wide brow, that terrible maidenhood,
      The marvel of that pitiless chastity,
   Ah! well content indeed, for never wight
   Since Troy’s young shepherd prince had seen so wonderful a sight.

   Ready for death he stood, but lo! the air
      Grew silent, and the horses ceased to neigh,
   And off his brow he tossed the clustering hair,
      And from his limbs he throw the cloak away;
   For whom would not such love make desperate?
   And nigher came, and touched her throat, and with hands violate

   Undid the cuirass, and the crocus gown,
      And bared the breasts of polished ivory,
   Till from the waist the peplos falling down
      Left visible the secret mystery
   Which to no lover will Athena show,
   The grand cool flanks, the crescent thighs, the bossy hills of snow.

   Those who have never known a lover’s sin
      Let them not read my ditty, it will be
   To their dull ears so musicless and thin
      That they will have no joy of it, but ye
   To whose wan cheeks now creeps the lingering smile,
   Ye who have learned who Eros is,—O listen yet awhile.

   A little space he let his greedy eyes
      Rest on the burnished image, till mere sight
   Half swooned for surfeit of such luxuries,
      And then his lips in hungering delight
   Fed on her lips, and round the towered neck
   He flung his arms, nor cared at all his passion’s will to check.

   Never I ween did lover hold such tryst,
      For all night long he murmured honeyed word,
   And saw her sweet unravished limbs, and kissed
      Her pale and argent body undisturbed,
   And paddled with the polished throat, and pressed
   His hot and beating heart upon her chill and icy breast.

   It was as if Numidian javelins
      Pierced through and through his wild and whirling brain,
   And his nerves thrilled like throbbing violins
      In exquisite pulsation, and the pain
   Was such sweet anguish that he never drew
   His lips from hers till overhead the lark of warning flew.

   They who have never seen the daylight peer
      Into a darkened room, and drawn the curtain,
   And with dull eyes and wearied from some dear
      And worshipped body risen, they for certain
   Will never know of what I try to sing,
   How long the last kiss was, how fond and late his lingering.

   The moon was girdled with a crystal rim,
      The sign which shipmen say is ominous
   Of wrath in heaven, the wan stars were dim,
      And the low lightening east was tremulous
   With the faint fluttering wings of flying dawn,
   Ere from the silent sombre shrine his lover had withdrawn.

   Down the steep rock with hurried feet and fast
      Clomb the brave lad, and reached the cave of Pan,
   And heard the goat-foot snoring as he passed,
      And leapt upon a grassy knoll and ran
   Like a young fawn unto an olive wood
   Which in a shady valley by the well-built city stood;

   And sought a little stream, which well he knew,
      For oftentimes with boyish careless shout
   The green and crested grebe he would pursue,
      Or snare in woven net the silver trout,
   And down amid the startled reeds he lay
   Panting in breathless sweet affright, and waited for the day.

   On the green bank he lay, and let one hand
      Dip in the cool dark eddies listlessly,
   And soon the breath of morning came and fanned
      His hot flushed cheeks, or lifted wantonly
   The tangled curls from off his forehead, while
   He on the running water gazed with strange and secret smile.

   And soon the shepherd in rough woollen cloak
      With his long crook undid the wattled cotes,
   And from the stack a thin blue wreath of smoke
      Curled through the air across the ripening oats,
   And on the hill the yellow house-dog bayed
   As through the crisp and rustling fern the heavy cattle strayed.

   And when the light-foot mower went afield
      Across the meadows laced with threaded dew,
   And the sheep bleated on the misty weald,
      And from its nest the waking corncrake flew,
   Some woodmen saw him lying by the stream
   And marvelled much that any lad so beautiful could seem,

   Nor deemed him born of mortals, and one said,
      ‘It is young Hylas, that false runaway
   Who with a Naiad now would make his bed
      Forgetting Herakles,’ but others, ‘Nay,
   It is Narcissus, his own paramour,
   Those are the fond and crimson lips no woman can allure.’

   And when they nearer came a third one cried,
      ‘It is young Dionysos who has hid
   His spear and fawnskin by the river side
      Weary of hunting with the Bassarid,
   And wise indeed were we away to fly:
   They live not long who on the gods immortal come to spy.’

   So turned they back, and feared to look behind,
      And told the timid swain how they had seen
   Amid the reeds some woodland god reclined,
      And no man dared to cross the open green,
   And on that day no olive-tree was slain,
   Nor rushes cut, but all deserted was the fair domain,

   Save when the neat-herd’s lad, his empty pail
      Well slung upon his back, with leap and bound
   Raced on the other side, and stopped to hail,
      Hoping that he some comrade new had found,
   And gat no answer, and then half afraid
   Passed on his simple way, or down the still and silent glade

   A little girl ran laughing from the farm,
      Not thinking of love’s secret mysteries,
   And when she saw the white and gleaming arm
      And all his manlihood, with longing eyes
   Whose passion mocked her sweet virginity
   Watched him awhile, and then stole back sadly and wearily.

   Far off he heard the city’s hum and noise,
      And now and then the shriller laughter where
   The passionate purity of brown-limbed boys
      Wrestled or raced in the clear healthful air,
   And now and then a little tinkling bell
   As the shorn wether led the sheep down to the mossy well.

   Through the grey willows danced the fretful gnat,
      The grasshopper chirped idly from the tree,
   In sleek and oily coat the water-rat
      Breasting the little ripples manfully
   Made for the wild-duck’s nest, from bough to bough
   Hopped the shy finch, and the huge tortoise crept across the slough.

   On the faint wind floated the silky seeds
      As the bright scythe swept through the waving grass,
   The ouzel-cock splashed circles in the reeds
      And flecked with silver whorls the forest’s glass,
   Which scarce had caught again its imagery
   Ere from its bed the dusky tench leapt at the dragon-fly.

   But little care had he for any thing
      Though up and down the beech the squirrel played,
   And from the copse the linnet ’gan to sing
      To its brown mate its sweetest serenade;
   Ah! little care indeed, for he had seen
   The breasts of Pallas and the naked wonder of the Queen.

   But when the herdsman called his straggling goats
      With whistling pipe across the rocky road,
   And the shard-beetle with its trumpet-notes
      Boomed through the darkening woods, and seemed to bode
   Of coming storm, and the belated crane
   Passed homeward like a shadow, and the dull big drops of rain

   Fell on the pattering fig-leaves, up he rose,
      And from the gloomy forest went his way
   Past sombre homestead and wet orchard-close,
      And came at last unto a little quay,
   And called his mates aboard, and took his seat
   On the high poop, and pushed from land, and loosed the dripping sheet,

   And steered across the bay, and when nine suns
      Passed down the long and laddered way of gold,
   And nine pale moons had breathed their orisons
      To the chaste stars their confessors, or told
   Their dearest secret to the downy moth
   That will not fly at noonday, through the foam and surging froth

   Came a great owl with yellow sulphurous eyes
      And lit upon the ship, whose timbers creaked
   As though the lading of three argosies
      Were in the hold, and flapped its wings and shrieked,
   And darkness straightway stole across the deep,
   Sheathed was Orion’s sword, dread Mars himself fled down the steep,

   And the moon hid behind a tawny mask
      Of drifting cloud, and from the ocean’s marge
   Rose the red plume, the huge and hornèd casque,
      The seven-cubit spear, the brazen targe!
   And clad in bright and burnished panoply
   Athena strode across the stretch of sick and shivering sea!

   To the dull sailors’ sight her loosened looks
      Seemed like the jagged storm-rack, and her feet
   Only the spume that floats on hidden rocks,
      And, marking how the rising waters beat
   Against the rolling ship, the pilot cried
   To the young helmsman at the stern to luff to windward side

   But he, the overbold adulterer,
      A dear profaner of great mysteries,
   An ardent amorous idolater,
      When he beheld those grand relentless eyes
   Laughed loud for joy, and crying out ‘I come’
   Leapt from the lofty poop into the chill and churning foam.

   Then fell from the high heaven one bright star,
      One dancer left the circling galaxy,
   And back to Athens on her clattering car
      In all the pride of venged divinity
   Pale Pallas swept with shrill and steely clank,
   And a few gurgling bubbles rose where her boy lover sank.

   And the mast shuddered as the gaunt owl flew
      With mocking hoots after the wrathful Queen,
   And the old pilot bade the trembling crew
      Hoist the big sail, and told how he had seen
   Close to the stern a dim and giant form,
   And like a dipping swallow the stout ship dashed through the storm.

   And no man dared to speak of Charmides
      Deeming that he some evil thing had wrought,
   And when they reached the strait Symplegades
      They beached their galley on the shore, and sought
   The toll-gate of the city hastily,
   And in the market showed their brown and pictured pottery.

                                     II.

   BUT some good Triton-god had ruth, and bare
      The boy’s drowned body back to Grecian land,
   And mermaids combed his dank and dripping hair
      And smoothed his brow, and loosed his clenching hand;
   Some brought sweet spices from far Araby,
   And others bade the halcyon sing her softest lullaby.

   And when he neared his old Athenian home,
      A mighty billow rose up suddenly
   Upon whose oily back the clotted foam
      Lay diapered in some strange fantasy,
   And clasping him unto its glassy breast
   Swept landward, like a white-maned steed upon a venturous quest!

   Now where Colonos leans unto the sea
      There lies a long and level stretch of lawn;
   The rabbit knows it, and the mountain bee
      For it deserts Hymettus, and the Faun
   Is not afraid, for never through the day
   Comes a cry ruder than the shout of shepherd lads at play.

   But often from the thorny labyrinth
      And tangled branches of the circling wood
   The stealthy hunter sees young Hyacinth
      Hurling the polished disk, and draws his hood
   Over his guilty gaze, and creeps away,
   Nor dares to wind his horn, or—else at the first break of day

   The Dryads come and throw the leathern ball
      Along the reedy shore, and circumvent
   Some goat-eared Pan to be their seneschal
      For fear of bold Poseidon’s ravishment,
   And loose their girdles, with shy timorous eyes,
   Lest from the surf his azure arms and purple beard should rise.

   On this side and on that a rocky cave,
      Hung with the yellow-belled laburnum, stands
   Smooth is the beach, save where some ebbing wave
      Leaves its faint outline etched upon the sands,
   As though it feared to be too soon forgot
   By the green rush, its playfellow,—and yet, it is a spot

   So small, that the inconstant butterfly
      Could steal the hoarded money from each flower
   Ere it was noon, and still not satisfy
      Its over-greedy love,—within an hour
   A sailor boy, were he but rude enow
   To land and pluck a garland for his galley’s painted prow,

   Would almost leave the little meadow bare,
      For it knows nothing of great pageantry,
   Only a few narcissi here and there
      Stand separate in sweet austerity,
   Dotting the unmown grass with silver stars,
   And here and there a daffodil waves tiny scimitars.

   Hither the billow brought him, and was glad
      Of such dear servitude, and where the land
   Was virgin of all waters laid the lad
      Upon the golden margent of the strand,
   And like a lingering lover oft returned
   To kiss those pallid limbs which once with intense fire burned,

   Ere the wet seas had quenched that holocaust,
      That self-fed flame, that passionate lustihead,
   Ere grisly death with chill and nipping frost
      Had withered up those lilies white and red
   Which, while the boy would through the forest range,
   Answered each other in a sweet antiphonal counter-change.

   And when at dawn the wood-nymphs, hand-in-hand,
      Threaded the bosky dell, their satyr spied
   The boy’s pale body stretched upon the sand,
      And feared Poseidon’s treachery, and cried,
   And like bright sunbeams flitting through a glade
   Each startled Dryad sought some safe and leafy ambuscade.

   Save one white girl, who deemed it would not be
      So dread a thing to feel a sea-god’s arms
   Crushing her breasts in amorous tyranny,
      And longed to listen to those subtle charms
   Insidious lovers weave when they would win
   Some fencèd fortress, and stole back again, nor thought it sin

   To yield her treasure unto one so fair,
      And lay beside him, thirsty with love’s drouth,
   Called him soft names, played with his tangled hair,
      And with hot lips made havoc of his mouth
   Afraid he might not wake, and then afraid
   Lest he might wake too soon, fled back, and then, fond renegade,

   Returned to fresh assault, and all day long
      Sat at his side, and laughed at her new toy,
   And held his hand, and sang her sweetest song,
      Then frowned to see how froward was the boy
   Who would not with her maidenhood entwine,
   Nor knew that three days since his eyes had looked on Proserpine;

   Nor knew what sacrilege his lips had done,
      But said, ‘He will awake, I know him well,
   He will awake at evening when the sun
      Hangs his red shield on Corinth’s citadel;
   This sleep is but a cruel treachery
   To make me love him more, and in some cavern of the sea

   Deeper than ever falls the fisher’s line
      Already a huge Triton blows his horn,
   And weaves a garland from the crystalline
      And drifting ocean-tendrils to adorn
   The emerald pillars of our bridal bed,
   For sphered in foaming silver, and with coral crownèd head,

   We two will sit upon a throne of pearl,
      And a blue wave will be our canopy,
   And at our feet the water-snakes will curl
      In all their amethystine panoply
   Of diamonded mail, and we will mark
   The mullets swimming by the mast of some storm-foundered bark,

   Vermilion-finned with eyes of bossy gold
      Like flakes of crimson light, and the great deep
   His glassy-portaled chamber will unfold,
      And we will see the painted dolphins sleep
   Cradled by murmuring halcyons on the rocks
   Where Proteus in quaint suit of green pastures his monstrous flocks.

   And tremulous opal-hued anemones
      Will wave their purple fringes where we tread
   Upon the mirrored floor, and argosies
      Of fishes flecked with tawny scales will thread
   The drifting cordage of the shattered wreck,
   And honey-coloured amber beads our twining limbs will deck.’

   But when that baffled Lord of War the Sun
      With gaudy pennon flying passed away
   Into his brazen House, and one by one
      The little yellow stars began to stray
   Across the field of heaven, ah! then indeed
   She feared his lips upon her lips would never care to feed,

   And cried, ‘Awake, already the pale moon
      Washes the trees with silver, and the wave
   Creeps grey and chilly up this sandy dune,
      The croaking frogs are out, and from the cave
   The nightjar shrieks, the fluttering bats repass,
   And the brown stoat with hollow flanks creeps through the dusky grass.

   Nay, though thou art a god, be not so coy,
      For in yon stream there is a little reed
   That often whispers how a lovely boy
      Lay with her once upon a grassy mead,
   Who when his cruel pleasure he had done
   Spread wings of rustling gold and soared aloft into the sun.

   Be not so coy, the laurel trembles still
      With great Apollo’s kisses, and the fir
   Whose clustering sisters fringe the seaward hill
      Hath many a tale of that bold ravisher
   Whom men call Boreas, and I have seen
   The mocking eyes of Hermes through the poplar’s silvery sheen.

   Even the jealous Naiads call me fair,
      And every morn a young and ruddy swain
   Woos me with apples and with locks of hair,
      And seeks to soothe my virginal disdain
   By all the gifts the gentle wood-nymphs love;
   But yesterday he brought to me an iris-plumaged dove

   With little crimson feet, which with its store
      Of seven spotted eggs the cruel lad
   Had stolen from the lofty sycamore
      At daybreak, when her amorous comrade had
   Flown off in search of berried juniper
   Which most they love; the fretful wasp, that earliest vintager

   Of the blue grapes, hath not persistency
      So constant as this simple shepherd-boy
   For my poor lips, his joyous purity
      And laughing sunny eyes might well decoy
   A Dryad from her oath to Artemis;
   For very beautiful is he, his mouth was made to kiss;

   His argent forehead, like a rising moon
      Over the dusky hills of meeting brows,
   Is crescent shaped, the hot and Tyrian noon
      Leads from the myrtle-grove no goodlier spouse
   For Cytheræa, the first silky down
   Fringes his blushing cheeks, and his young limbs are strong and brown;

   And he is rich, and fat and fleecy herds
      Of bleating sheep upon his meadows lie,
   And many an earthen bowl of yellow curds
      Is in his homestead for the thievish fly
   To swim and drown in, the pink clover mead
   Keeps its sweet store for him, and he can pipe on oaten reed.

   And yet I love him not; it was for thee
      I kept my love; I knew that thou would’st come
   To rid me of this pallid chastity,
      Thou fairest flower of the flowerless foam
   Of all the wide Ægean, brightest star
   Of ocean’s azure heavens where the mirrored planets are!

   I knew that thou would’st come, for when at first
      The dry wood burgeoned, and the sap of spring
   Swelled in my green and tender bark or burst
      To myriad multitudinous blossoming
   Which mocked the midnight with its mimic moons
   That did not dread the dawn, and first the thrushes’ rapturous tunes

   Startled the squirrel from its granary,
      And cuckoo flowers fringed the narrow lane,
   Through my young leaves a sensuous ecstasy
      Crept like new wine, and every mossy vein
   Throbbed with the fitful pulse of amorous blood,
   And the wild winds of passion shook my slim stem’s maidenhood.

   The trooping fawns at evening came and laid
      Their cool black noses on my lowest boughs,
   And on my topmost branch the blackbird made
      A little nest of grasses for his spouse,
   And now and then a twittering wren would light
   On a thin twig which hardly bare the weight of such delight.

   I was the Attic shepherd’s trysting place,
      Beneath my shadow Amaryllis lay,
   And round my trunk would laughing Daphnis chase
      The timorous girl, till tired out with play
   She felt his hot breath stir her tangled hair,
   And turned, and looked, and fled no more from such delightful snare.

   Then come away unto my ambuscade
      Where clustering woodbine weaves a canopy
   For amorous pleasaunce, and the rustling shade
      Of Paphian myrtles seems to sanctify
   The dearest rites of love; there in the cool
   And green recesses of its farthest depth there is pool,

   The ouzel’s haunt, the wild bee’s pasturage,
      For round its rim great creamy lilies float
   Through their flat leaves in verdant anchorage,
      Each cup a white-sailed golden-laden boat
   Steered by a dragon-fly,—be not afraid
   To leave this wan and wave-kissed shore, surely the place was made

   For lovers such as we; the Cyprian Queen,
      One arm around her boyish paramour,
   Strays often there at eve, and I have seen
      The moon strip off her misty vestiture
   For young Endymion’s eyes; be not afraid,
   The panther feet of Dian never tread that secret glade.

   Nay if thou will’st, back to the beating brine,
      Back to the boisterous billow let us go,
   And walk all day beneath the hyaline
      Huge vault of Neptune’s watery portico,
   And watch the purple monsters of the deep
   Sport in ungainly play, and from his lair keen Xiphias leap.

   For if my mistress find me lying here
      She will not ruth or gentle pity show,
   But lay her boar-spear down, and with austere
      Relentless fingers string the cornel bow,
   And draw the feathered notch against her breast,
   And loose the archèd cord; aye, even now upon the quest

   I hear her hurrying feet,—awake, awake,
      Thou laggard in love’s battle! once at least
   Let me drink deep of passion’s wine, and slake
      My parchèd being with the nectarous feast
   Which even gods affect!  O come, Love, come,
   Still we have time to reach the cavern of thine azure home.’

   Scarce had she spoken when the shuddering trees
      Shook, and the leaves divided, and the air
   Grew conscious of a god, and the grey seas
      Crawled backward, and a long and dismal blare
   Blew from some tasselled horn, a sleuth-hound bayed,
   And like a flame a barbèd reed flew whizzing down the glade.

   And where the little flowers of her breast
      Just brake into their milky blossoming,
   This murderous paramour, this unbidden guest,
      Pierced and struck deep in horrid chambering,
   And ploughed a bloody furrow with its dart,
   And dug a long red road, and cleft with wingèd death her heart.

   Sobbing her life out with a bitter cry
      On the boy’s body fell the Dryad maid,
   Sobbing for incomplete virginity,
      And raptures unenjoyed, and pleasures dead,
   And all the pain of things unsatisfied,
   And the bright drops of crimson youth crept down her throbbing side.

   Ah! pitiful it was to hear her moan,
      And very pitiful to see her die
   Ere she had yielded up her sweets, or known
      The joy of passion, that dread mystery
   Which not to know is not to live at all,
   And yet to know is to be held in death’s most deadly thrall.

   But as it hapt the Queen of Cythere,
      Who with Adonis all night long had lain
   Within some shepherd’s hut in Arcady,
      On team of silver doves and gilded wain
   Was journeying Paphos-ward, high up afar
   From mortal ken between the mountains and the morning star,

   And when low down she spied the hapless pair,
      And heard the Oread’s faint despairing cry,
   Whose cadence seemed to play upon the air
      As though it were a viol, hastily
   She bade her pigeons fold each straining plume,
   And dropt to earth, and reached the strand, and saw their dolorous
   doom.

   For as a gardener turning back his head
      To catch the last notes of the linnet, mows
   With careless scythe too near some flower bed,
      And cuts the thorny pillar of the rose,
   And with the flower’s loosened loneliness
   Strews the brown mould; or as some shepherd lad in wantonness

   Driving his little flock along the mead
      Treads down two daffodils, which side by aide
   Have lured the lady-bird with yellow brede
      And made the gaudy moth forget its pride,
   Treads down their brimming golden chalices
   Under light feet which were not made for such rude ravages;

   Or as a schoolboy tired of his book
      Flings himself down upon the reedy grass
   And plucks two water-lilies from the brook,
      And for a time forgets the hour glass,
   Then wearies of their sweets, and goes his way,
   And lets the hot sun kill them, even go these lovers lay.

   And Venus cried, ‘It is dread Artemis
      Whose bitter hand hath wrought this cruelty,
   Or else that mightier maid whose care it is
      To guard her strong and stainless majesty
   Upon the hill Athenian,—alas!
   That they who loved so well unloved into Death’s house should pass.’

   So with soft hands she laid the boy and girl
      In the great golden waggon tenderly
   (Her white throat whiter than a moony pearl
      Just threaded with a blue vein’s tapestry
   Had not yet ceased to throb, and still her breast
   Swayed like a wind-stirred lily in ambiguous unrest)

   And then each pigeon spread its milky van,
      The bright car soared into the dawning sky,
   And like a cloud the aerial caravan
      Passed over the Ægean silently,
   Till the faint air was troubled with the song
   From the wan mouths that call on bleeding Thammuz all night long.

   But when the doves had reached their wonted goal
      Where the wide stair of orbèd marble dips
   Its snows into the sea, her fluttering soul
      Just shook the trembling petals of her lips
   And passed into the void, and Venus knew
   That one fair maid the less would walk amid her retinue,

   And bade her servants carve a cedar chest
      With all the wonder of this history,
   Within whose scented womb their limbs should rest
      Where olive-trees make tender the blue sky
   On the low hills of Paphos, and the Faun
   Pipes in the noonday, and the nightingale sings on till dawn.

   Nor failed they to obey her hest, and ere
      The morning bee had stung the daffodil
   With tiny fretful spear, or from its lair
      The waking stag had leapt across the rill
   And roused the ouzel, or the lizard crept
   Athwart the sunny rock, beneath the grass their bodies slept.

   And when day brake, within that silver shrine
      Fed by the flames of cressets tremulous,
   Queen Venus knelt and prayed to Proserpine
      That she whose beauty made Death amorous
   Should beg a guerdon from her pallid Lord,
   And let Desire pass across dread Charon’s icy ford.

                                     III

   IN melancholy moonless Acheron,
      Farm for the goodly earth and joyous day
   Where no spring ever buds, nor ripening sun
      Weighs down the apple trees, nor flowery May
   Chequers with chestnut blooms the grassy floor,
   Where thrushes never sing, and piping linnets mate no more,

   There by a dim and dark Lethæan well
      Young Charmides was lying; wearily
   He plucked the blossoms from the asphodel,
      And with its little rifled treasury
   Strewed the dull waters of the dusky stream,
   And watched the white stars founder, and the land was like a dream,

   When as he gazed into the watery glass
      And through his brown hair’s curly tangles scanned
   His own wan face, a shadow seemed to pass
      Across the mirror, and a little hand
   Stole into his, and warm lips timidly
   Brushed his pale cheeks, and breathed their secret forth into a sigh.

   Then turned he round his weary eyes and saw,
      And ever nigher still their faces came,
   And nigher ever did their young mouths draw
      Until they seemed one perfect rose of flame,
   And longing arms around her neck he cast,
   And felt her throbbing bosom, and his breath came hot and fast,

   And all his hoarded sweets were hers to kiss,
      And all her maidenhood was his to slay,
   And limb to limb in long and rapturous bliss
      Their passion waxed and waned,—O why essay
   To pipe again of love, too venturous reed!
   Enough, enough that Eros laughed upon that flowerless mead.

   Too venturous poesy, O why essay
      To pipe again of passion! fold thy wings
   O’er daring Icarus and bid thy lay
      Sleep hidden in the lyre’s silent strings
   Till thou hast found the old Castalian rill,
   Or from the Lesbian waters plucked drowned Sappho’s golden quid!

   Enough, enough that he whose life had been
      A fiery pulse of sin, a splendid shame,
   Could in the loveless land of Hades glean
      One scorching harvest from those fields of flame
   Where passion walks with naked unshod feet
   And is not wounded,—ah! enough that once their lips could meet

   In that wild throb when all existences
      Seemed narrowed to one single ecstasy
   Which dies through its own sweetness and the stress
      Of too much pleasure, ere Persephone
   Had bade them serve her by the ebon throne
   Of the pale God who in the fields of Enna loosed her zone.
